pact-plugin/README.md, before:

# PACT Framework Plugin

> **Version**: 2.0.0
> **License**: MIT

VSM-enhanced orchestration framework for AI-assisted software development with Claude Code.

## What's Included

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| **7 Specialist Agents** | Preparer, Architect, Backend/Frontend/Database Coders, n8n, Test Engineer |
| **8 Commands** | orchestrate, comPACT, rePACT, plan-mode, imPACT, peer-review, pin-memory, wrap-up |
| **14 Skills** | Domain knowledge for architecture, coding, testing, security, n8n workflows |
| **Protocols** | VSM-based coordination, algedonic signals, variety management |

## Quick Start

After installing this plugin, use these commands:

```
/PACT:orchestrate <task>     # Full multi-agent workflow
/PACT:comPACT <domain> <task> # Single specialist, light ceremony
/PACT:plan-mode <task>        # Strategic planning before implementation
```

## Key Features (v2.0)

- **Variety Management**: Tasks scored on complexity; ceremony scales accordingly
- **Viability Sensing**: Agents emit HALT/ALERT signals for security, data, ethics issues
- **Adaptive Workflow**: From quick fixes to full orchestration based on task complexity
- **Continuous Audit**: Parallel quality feedback during implementation

## Documentation

For full documentation, visit the main repository:
https://github.com/ProfSynapse/PACT-prompt

## Reference

- @~/.claude/protocols/pact-protocols.md - Coordination protocols
- @~/.claude/protocols/algedonic.md - Emergency signal protocol
- @~/.claude/reference/vsm-glossary.md - VSM terminology in PACT context

Commit message:

docs: clarify pact-protocols.md as source of truth in README

pact-plugin/README.md, after:

# PACT Framework Plugin

> **Version**: 2.0.0
> **License**: MIT

VSM-enhanced orchestration framework for AI-assisted software development with Claude Code.

## What's Included

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| **7 Specialist Agents** | Preparer, Architect, Backend/Frontend/Database Coders, n8n, Test Engineer |
| **8 Commands** | orchestrate, comPACT, rePACT, plan-mode, imPACT, peer-review, pin-memory, wrap-up |
| **14 Skills** | Domain knowledge for architecture, coding, testing, security, n8n workflows |
| **Protocols** | VSM-based coordination, algedonic signals, variety management |

## Quick Start

After installing this plugin, use these commands:

```
/PACT:orchestrate <task>     # Full multi-agent workflow
/PACT:comPACT <domain> <task> # Single specialist, light ceremony
/PACT:plan-mode <task>        # Strategic planning before implementation
```

## Key Features (v2.0)

- **Variety Management**: Tasks scored on complexity; ceremony scales accordingly
- **Viability Sensing**: Agents emit HALT/ALERT signals for security, data, ethics issues
- **Adaptive Workflow**: From quick fixes to full orchestration based on task complexity
- **Continuous Audit**: Parallel quality feedback during implementation

## Documentation

For full documentation, visit the main repository:
https://github.com/ProfSynapse/PACT-prompt

## Reference

- pact-protocols.md - Source of truth (see granular pact-*.md files for imports)
- @~/.claude/protocols/algedonic.md - Emergency signal protocol
- @~/.claude/reference/vsm-glossary.md - VSM terminology in PACT context
